docs: Restructure node setups and docs (#5161)
iotaledger/iota: docs/content/operator/validator-node/configuration.mdx

---
title: Validator Node Configuration
description: Prepare the configuration file for the IOTA validator node.
tags: [node-operation]
teams:
  - iotaledger/node
---

The IOTA validator node configuration file is a YAML file (usually named `validator.yaml`) that you can use to configure
your `iota-node`.

>  To simplify the setup process, you can use a validator node configuration file [template](https://github.com/iotaledger/iota/raw/refs/heads/develop/nre/config/validator.yaml) and modify it to your needs.

Author: ```suggestion
 To simplify the setup process, you can use a validator node configuration file [template](https://github.com/iotaledger/iota/raw/refs/heads/develop/setups/validator/systemd/validator.yaml) and modify it to your needs.
```

Reviewer: Fixed in ede15b84a110e29ed56b96fd6ceade6336c84587

This default template uses default ports, archive and pruning settings, and also covers peering configuration for the selected network. If you're fine with the default settings, you can use the template as is and continue with the node setup either [using Docker](docker.mdx) or [using systemd](systemd.mdx).

For more specific guidance on how to configure your node to suit your needs, e.g., configure snapshot, refer to the following sections:

- [Genesis](configs/genesis.mdx) - More details on genesis.
- [Network](configs/network.mdx) - Peering configuration for the node.
- [Pruning](configs/pruning.mdx) - How to prune your IOTA Full Node to leverage storage space.
- [Snapshots](configs/snapshots.mdx) - How to configure formal and RocksDB snapshots for your IOTA Full Node.

> - [Archives](configs/archives.mdx) - How to configure archives for your IOTA Full Node.

Author: validator nodes in that case.

Reviewer: Fixed in 4ede82f7c79c876c7450776bc4e8533df1c5ef01
